---
code: POL_CONFLICT
title: Conflict of Interest Policy
category: Policies
tier: 2
acknowledgement: yes
summary: How to recognise and declare a conflict between your own interests and a participant's, including the conflicts specific to NDIS practice — recommending equipment, referring to a related provider, and holding more than one role for the same person.
reviewCycleMonths: 24
basis: NDIS Practice Standards; NDIS Code of Conduct element 4; Occupational Therapy Board of Australia — Code of conduct
related: POL_CODE_OF_CONDUCT; POL_GIFTS; POL_BOUNDARIES; POL_PARTICIPANT_RIGHTS
---
CONFLICT OF INTEREST POLICY

1. PURPOSE

A participant relies on our recommendation being about them. A conflict of interest is anything that could reasonably be seen to compromise that — and the test is the appearance, not only the reality, because a participant cannot see inside your reasoning and should not have to.

Having a conflict is not misconduct. Failing to declare one is.

2. THE THREE KINDS

2.1 Actual — your interests and the participant's genuinely diverge right now.
2.2 Potential — they could diverge if circumstances change.
2.3 Perceived — a reasonable person, knowing the facts, could think your judgement was affected. This one is declared on exactly the same terms as the others.

3. THE CONFLICTS THAT ACTUALLY ARISE IN THIS PRACTICE

3.1 Equipment and assistive technology. Recommending a product where you, a family member or Opal receive a commission, discount, rebate, sponsorship, referral fee or other benefit from the supplier. Also: a supplier relationship that has become comfortable enough that you stop comparing options.

3.2 Referrals within a group. Referring to another service that Opal, an owner or a relative has an interest in, without telling the participant that connection exists and without offering alternatives.

3.3 Multiple roles for one participant. Acting as both their therapist and their support coordinator, plan manager or behaviour support practitioner. The NDIS Practice Standards treat this as a conflict to be managed transparently, and Opal treats it as one to be avoided where it reasonably can be.

3.4 Assessment and provision. Writing the functional capacity or equipment report that recommends a service Opal then delivers. This is common and often unavoidable in a small practice. It must be disclosed to the participant in writing, and the report must stand on evidence a different clinician would reach the same way.

3.5 Personal relationships. Providing services to a friend, a relative, a neighbour or a former partner. Employing, supervising or making decisions about a person you have a close personal relationship with. Being involved in a hiring decision about a friend or relative.

3.6 Outside work. Private practice, other employment, consultancy, teaching, a board position, or a business that competes with Opal or draws on Opal's participants, systems or information.

3.7 Gifts, hospitality and benefits. Including supplier-funded conferences, meals, product training and travel. See the Gifts and Benefits Policy.

3.8 Financial involvement with a participant. Prohibited outright — see the Professional Boundaries Policy.

4. YOUR OBLIGATIONS

4.1 Declare it as soon as you become aware of it. Not at the end of the episode of care, and not when someone asks.

4.2 Declare in writing to your supervisor and to [TO CONFIRM: the role or register where conflict declarations are recorded]. Say what the interest is, who it affects, and what you propose to do about it.

4.3 Declare on commencement, when anything changes, and at [TO CONFIRM: annual declaration cycle, if one is adopted].

4.4 Do not act on the matter until you have been told how it is being managed, unless waiting would harm the participant.

4.5 When you are uncertain whether something counts, declare it. The cost of an unnecessary declaration is five minutes.

5. HOW A CONFLICT IS MANAGED

In rough order of preference: avoid it — reallocate the participant or the decision; restrict it — remove yourself from the specific decision while continuing the rest of the work; disclose and monitor it — tell the participant plainly, in writing, offer them genuine alternatives, and have the decision reviewed independently.

Disclosure alone is the weakest control and is not enough on its own for a significant conflict.

Whatever is decided is recorded, along with who decided it.

6. WHAT THE PARTICIPANT MUST BE TOLD

Where a conflict affects a participant, they are told plainly: what the connection is, what alternatives exist, that they may choose a different provider or supplier, and that their supports will not be affected by that choice. In writing, in a form they can use, and recorded in their file.

7. PROCUREMENT AND SUPPLIER RELATIONSHIPS

Compare options for any significant equipment recommendation and record the comparison in the participant's file — what was considered, what was recommended, and why. Do not accept a benefit from a supplier that is conditional on volume or on recommending their product. Report any offer of a commission or referral fee.

8. BREACHES

An undeclared conflict that affects a participant's care or Opal's funding is a serious disciplinary matter and may be reportable to the NDIS Commission or AHPRA. As with everything else here, declaring late is far better than not declaring.

DOCUMENT CONTROL
Owner: [TO CONFIRM: role responsible for this policy]
Approved by: [TO CONFIRM: name and role]
Date approved: [TO CONFIRM: date]
Version: 0.1 — generated draft, pending Owner review
Review cycle: every 24 months
Next review due: [TO CONFIRM: date]
