---
code: POL_LONE_WORKER
title: Lone Worker Policy
category: WHS
tier: 3
acknowledgement: yes
summary: The check-in and escalation system that makes sure somebody notices if you do not come back — who monitors it, what happens when a check-in is missed, and the extra arrangements for remote and rural work.
reviewCycleMonths: 12
basis: Work Health and Safety Act 2020 (WA); Work Health and Safety (General) Regulations 2022 (WA) — remote or isolated work; WorkSafe WA guidance
related: POL_WHS; POL_HOME_VISIT; POL_VEHICLE; POL_EMERGENCY; POL_INCIDENT
---
LONE WORKER POLICY

1. PURPOSE

Almost everyone here works alone for most of the day. The specific risk this policy addresses is not that something happens — it is that something happens and nobody knows for hours.

The WHS Regulations require an employer to provide a system of work that includes effective communication with a worker carrying out remote or isolated work. This is that system. It only works if it is used every time, including on the ordinary days, because a check-in system that is used selectively cannot tell the difference between a missed check-in and a forgotten one.

2. WHO IS A LONE WORKER HERE

Anyone working without another Opal worker present: a home visit, a school or community visit, travel between appointments, work in the office outside normal hours, and any remote or rural visit.

3. THE CHECK-IN SYSTEM

3.1 Your calendar is the baseline. Every visit is in it, with the address and the expected finish time, kept current during the day. A colleague must be able to answer "where is she right now?" from your calendar alone.

3.2 Check in and out for each visit by [TO CONFIRM: the check-in method — portal, SMS to a monitored number, or a phone call — and the number or channel].

3.3 Who monitors it: [TO CONFIRM: the role that monitors check-ins during business hours, and after hours].

3.4 Extend it if you are running over. A visit that runs long is normal; an unannounced visit that runs long is indistinguishable from a problem.

4. ESCALATION WHEN A CHECK-IN IS MISSED

This is what happens if you do not check out, and it is the reason the system matters:

Step 1 — after [TO CONFIRM: minutes] past the expected finish, the monitor phones you.
Step 2 — no answer: they phone again and send a message, and try [TO CONFIRM: any secondary contact method].
Step 3 — still no answer after [TO CONFIRM: minutes]: they phone the participant or the site on the number in the file.
Step 4 — still unresolved: they notify [TO CONFIRM: the escalation contact] and attempt to locate you, including your emergency contact.
Step 5 — where there is reason to believe you are at risk, they call the police on 131 444, or 000 if there is immediate concern.

Opal will always err toward escalating. If a missed check-in turns out to be a flat battery, that is a good outcome, not an embarrassment, and nobody will be criticised for triggering it.

5. YOUR OBLIGATIONS

• Check in and check out, every time.
• Keep your calendar accurate.
• Keep your phone charged, on, and on you — not in your bag in the car.
• Answer or return a check-in call promptly.
• Tell the monitor before you go somewhere with poor coverage, and give an expected clear time.
• Update the monitor if plans change during the day.
• Do not disable location sharing where it forms part of the arrangement.

6. DURESS AND CODE WORDS

Where you need help but cannot say so in front of someone, use the agreed duress phrase: [TO CONFIRM: the agreed duress word or phrase, and who is trained to recognise it]. It should be something you could say in a normal call — for example asking about a file or a person that does not exist. Anyone receiving it escalates immediately to step 5 and does not ask a clarifying question.

Personal duress alarms: [TO CONFIRM: whether duress alarms or a lone worker app are provided, and to whom].

7. REMOTE AND RURAL WORK

7.1 Plan it in advance with your supervisor. A remote visit is not a normal visit that happens to be further away.

7.2 Before departure, agree: the route, the expected arrival and return times, overnight arrangements, coverage blackspots and clear times, fuel stops, and who is monitoring.

7.3 Where there is no reliable mobile coverage, a satellite messenger or a personal locator beacon is required: [TO CONFIRM: what remote communication equipment Opal provides and how it is booked].

7.4 Carry water, food, a first aid kit and warm clothing appropriate to the season. See the Vehicle and Travel Policy for the vehicle requirements.

7.5 Fatigue is the dominant risk on a long rural day. Do not plan a full clinical load on top of a long drive, and do not drive home after a day that has already run long — see the Vehicle and Travel Policy for overnight arrangements.

8. AFTER HOURS AND OFFICE WORK ALONE

Tell someone if you are working alone in the office outside normal hours, lock the external doors, and check in when you leave. The same escalation applies.

9. IF THE SYSTEM FAILS

If you cannot reach the monitor, if a check-in was missed and nobody followed up, or if the arrangement is not workable in practice, report it as a WHS matter. A control that quietly stopped working is more dangerous than no control at all, because everyone is relying on it.

DOCUMENT CONTROL
Owner: [TO CONFIRM: role responsible for this policy]
Approved by: [TO CONFIRM: name and role]
Date approved: [TO CONFIRM: date]
Version: 0.1 — generated draft, pending Owner review. Sections 3, 4 and 6 must be completed with real names, numbers and timings — an escalation procedure with placeholders in it is not a control.
Review cycle: every 12 months
Next review due: [TO CONFIRM: date]
