---
code: POL_RECORDS
title: Records Management Policy
category: Policies
tier: 2
acknowledgement: yes
summary: What Opal Therapy keeps, where it keeps it, how long for, how it is destroyed, and the rules that apply when a record is subject to a subpoena, a complaint or an investigation.
reviewCycleMonths: 24
basis: Privacy Act 1988 (Cth) and Australian Privacy Principle 11; Fair Work Act 2009 (Cth) record-keeping obligations and Fair Work Regulations 2009; Limitation Act 2005 (WA); NDIS Practice Standards
related: POL_PRIVACY; POL_CLINICAL_DOC; POL_INFOSEC; POL_COLLECTION_NOTICE
---
RECORDS MANAGEMENT POLICY

1. PURPOSE

Two failures are possible with records, and they pull in opposite directions: keeping something too long, and not being able to produce something you should still have. This policy sets out which is which.

2. SCOPE

Every record Opal creates or receives, in any format — portal entries, documents, email, photographs, recordings, text messages about work, handwritten notes, and paper files.

A work-related message on a personal device is an Opal record. That is a reason to keep work communication on Opal systems, where it is captured properly.

3. THE SYSTEM OF RECORD

The portal is the system of record. A record that exists only in your email, on a local drive, in a notebook or on a personal device is not filed, cannot be found by anyone else, and cannot be produced when it is needed.

Working documents are moved into the portal when they are finished. Personal drives and desktops are not storage.

4. RETENTION PERIODS

These are minimum periods. Where two apply, the longer one wins.

4.1 Adult participant clinical records — at least 7 years from the date of last contact.

4.2 Child or young person's clinical records — until the person turns 25, or 7 years from last contact, whichever is later. The reason is the limitation period: it generally does not begin to run until a person turns 18.

4.3 Employee records — at least 7 years after employment ends, as the Fair Work Act requires for time and wages records.

4.4 Workplace injury, workers compensation and rehabilitation records — [TO CONFIRM: retention period, noting exposure-related records may need to be kept far longer].

4.5 WHS records — hazard, incident and risk records for at least 5 years, and longer for a notifiable incident or where exposure monitoring applies.

4.6 Incident and complaint records — at least 7 years.

4.7 Financial and tax records — at least 5 years, and 7 where another obligation applies.

4.8 Recordings, photographs and video — kept only for the purpose and period the participant consented to, and destroyed at the end of it. Consent is recorded with the file.

4.9 Unsuccessful job applications — [TO CONFIRM: retention period for unsuccessful applicants].

5. DESTRUCTION

5.1 Nothing is destroyed except under an approved schedule, and the destruction is recorded — what, when, by whom, under what authority.

5.2 Paper is destroyed by secure shredding or a secure destruction service. Electronic records are deleted from live systems and from backups in line with the backup cycle. Devices are securely wiped or physically destroyed before disposal.

5.3 Never destroy a record on your own initiative. If you think something should go, say so; do not act.

6. LEGAL HOLD — THE RULE THAT OVERRIDES EVERYTHING ABOVE

The moment a record is, or may become, relevant to a complaint, an incident investigation, a regulator's inquiry, a coronial matter, a subpoena, a claim or litigation:
• stop any scheduled destruction of it immediately;
• do not edit, tidy, reorganise or "complete" it;
• tell [TO CONFIRM: role responsible for legal holds] straight away.

Altering or destroying a record that is subject to a legal process is a criminal offence, and doing it out of a wish to be helpful is not a defence. Preserve first, ask second.

7. REQUESTS FOR RECORDS

7.1 A participant asking for their own records — Privacy & Confidentiality Policy. Do not release anything yourself.

7.2 A subpoena, warrant, court order or statutory notice — pass it to [TO CONFIRM: role responsible for handling subpoenas] the day it arrives. Deadlines are short and non-negotiable.

7.3 Another provider requesting records — only with the participant's consent, or where a lawful exception applies.

7.4 A transfer of care — provide records promptly when a participant moves to another provider. Opal keeps its copy for the retention period; the participant leaving does not shorten it.

8. QUALITY

A record you cannot find is a record you do not have. Name things consistently, file them where they belong, and file them promptly. Version control matters most on documents that go out — the version sent to a funder must be identifiable later.

9. BACKUPS AND CONTINUITY

Opal's systems are backed up under [TO CONFIRM: backup arrangement and restore testing frequency]. Backups are not an archive: they exist to recover from failure, not to satisfy retention obligations.

DOCUMENT CONTROL
Owner: [TO CONFIRM: role responsible for this policy]
Approved by: [TO CONFIRM: name and role]
Date approved: [TO CONFIRM: date]
Version: 0.1 — generated draft, pending Owner review
Review cycle: every 24 months
Next review due: [TO CONFIRM: date]
