---
code: POL_GIFTS
title: Gifts and Benefits Policy
category: Policies
tier: 3
acknowledgement: no
summary: When you may accept a gift from a participant or a supplier, when you must decline, what has to be declared, and how to refuse graciously without hurting someone who is genuinely grateful.
reviewCycleMonths: 24
basis: NDIS Code of Conduct element 4; NDIS Practice Standards; Occupational Therapy Board of Australia — Code of conduct
related: POL_CONFLICT; POL_BOUNDARIES; POL_CODE_OF_CONDUCT; POL_EXPENSES
---
GIFTS AND BENEFITS POLICY

1. WHY THIS IS NOT TRIVIAL

Two very different things get called a gift. A participant handing you a jar of homemade jam at the end of a long piece of work is one. A supplier funding your conference attendance while you are writing equipment recommendations is the other. The first is a relationship to be handled with care; the second is a conflict of interest wearing a friendly face.

2. THE TEST

Before accepting anything, ask:
• Could this reasonably look like it might influence my professional judgement?
• Would I be comfortable if the participant's family, my colleagues, the NDIS Commission or a journalist knew about it?
• Is this person in a position where they may feel they have to give me something?
• Is this a pattern, or a one-off?

If you hesitate on any of them, decline or declare.

3. GIFTS FROM PARTICIPANTS AND FAMILIES

3.1 May be accepted without declaration: a token of low value, given as thanks, at the natural end of a piece of work — chocolates, flowers, a card, baked goods, something handmade. Share it with the team where you can; that is usually the spirit it was given in.

3.2 Must be declined: money in any form, gift cards and vouchers, alcohol above token value, jewellery, electronics, anything of significant value, anything given repeatedly, and anything given before or during a decision that affects the participant — a report, an equipment recommendation, a funding submission.

3.3 Never, under any circumstances: a loan in either direction, a bequest or inheritance, property, being named in a will, or any involvement in a participant's financial affairs. See the Professional Boundaries Policy.

3.4 Declaration threshold: anything valued above [TO CONFIRM: the declaration threshold, commonly $50] must be declared in writing to your supervisor and recorded in [TO CONFIRM: the gifts and benefits register and who maintains it], whether you accepted it or declined it. Recording a decline is as useful as recording an acceptance.

4. HOW TO DECLINE WITHOUT CAUSING HURT

Someone who has saved up to buy you something is not trying to compromise you, and being refused can feel like rejection. Say something true and warm: that you are not allowed to accept it, that the rule exists to keep things fair for everyone, and that what would mean the most is feedback about the service — or a note we can share with the team.

If declining would cause real distress to a person for whom giving is culturally significant, accept it, declare it, and discuss it with your supervisor. Cultural context is a legitimate consideration and it is a reason to consult, not a loophole.

5. SUPPLIERS, VENDORS AND OTHER PROVIDERS

Held to a stricter standard, because the risk is direct.

5.1 Acceptable: product information, genuine clinical education, a working lunch at a training session, product samples for clinical evaluation that are logged.

5.2 Not acceptable: commissions, referral fees, kickbacks, or any payment linked to recommending a product; travel, accommodation or conference attendance funded by a supplier without written pre-approval; entertainment, event tickets and hospitality beyond a modest working meal; personal discounts on products you recommend professionally; and gifts to your household.

5.3 Every offer from a supplier is declared, accepted or not, under the Conflict of Interest Policy.

5.4 Where an equipment recommendation is involved, the comparison of options goes in the participant's file — what was considered, what was recommended, and why. That record is the answer to any later question about influence.

6. GIFTS FROM OPAL TO OTHERS

Do not give a gift, discount or benefit to a participant, a family member or a referrer that could look like an inducement. Opal does not pay for referrals. Small acknowledgements to another organisation — a thank you, flowers after a bereavement — are approved by [TO CONFIRM: who approves gifts given on Opal's behalf].

7. IF YOU GET IT WRONG

If you accepted something you should not have, say so. It is usually fixable — return it, donate it, or declare it late. An unreported gift discovered later looks like concealment, however innocent it was.

DOCUMENT CONTROL
Owner: [TO CONFIRM: role responsible for this policy]
Approved by: [TO CONFIRM: name and role]
Date approved: [TO CONFIRM: date]
Version: 0.1 — generated draft, pending Owner review
Review cycle: every 24 months
Next review due: [TO CONFIRM: date]
